Good morning. My name is Dan Kneebrig. I'm the executive assistant to our center
director, and on his behalf, I would like to welcome you to this, the third in a
series of 20th anniversary of Apollo lectures and discussions that we've been
having. The first two dealt with what we knew about the moon before Apollo, and
then yesterday with the technical planning for the Apollo missions. Today's
sessions cover an aspect of our work here that is unique to the Johnson Space
Center, that of mission control, and more importantly, about the planning for
the operation of those missions that are so essential to the success of the
missions. Each of our panelists today is eminently qualified to discuss the
topics because they have all served as flight directors or mission controllers
during the Apollo program. Now, of course, later in their life, they went on to
other ancillary positions like center director and program manager and a few
unimportant jobs like that, but I'm sure they would all consider their time in
mission control to be among the highlights of their career. Our moderator today
is also eminently qualified for this subject. Dr. Joe Allen received his Ph.D.
from Yale University and in 1967 was selected as a NASA astronaut. Joe was on
the support crew for Apollo 15 where he served as the mission scientist. He was
Capcom for STS-1 and then flew as a mission specialist on STS-5 and 51A. So he
has qualifications from both the ground and flight to serve on this panel. I'm
sure you've all seen pictures of Joe tooling around in space in his jaunty EMU
rescuing distressed satellites as we did on 51A. He is currently the president
of Space Industries, Incorporated, here in Houston. Please welcome Dr. Joe
Allen.
–Dan, thank you very much and welcome everyone. I'm pleased to be the moderator
today. Every group of flight directors needs moderation, and I've been given
that assignment and I welcome it. I appreciate it very much. As Dan said, I was
at NASA here at the Johnson Space Center for a number of years, and I think my
main qualification to serve as referee today is the fact that I was also
privileged to work in the mission control for a number of years. It's a very
interesting, demanding, and more often than not, an enjoyable assignment. I
worked for these gentlemen on the panel who were chief flight directors during
the Apollo years. And their assignment for today over the next couple of hours
or so is to recollect, and I quote the instructions given to us, recollect
important aspects of the missions themselves. They're eminently qualified to do
that, and if they don't remember the important things, I guarantee they'll
remember some of the intriguing things, and I hope some of the amusing things
that occurred from the perspective of the flight directors during the Apollo
missions. We're gathered, really, to observe these missions and to celebrate the
remarkable success of them. The main intent of today's panel is to celebrate and
to enjoy. joy. And to that end, if you are curious about one or two things they
don't quite explain, please hold up your hand. And starting very early, I think
we'll begin with questions from the audience. And I know if you don't have
questions, there are numbers of things I've wondered about that I will begin to
ask about. Now my panel members are starting here, Dr. Glenn Lunny, Glenn is
from Pennsylvania, from Old Forage, Pennsylvania, and he comes to the space
business by way of the University of Scranton in Detroit. Glenn began, not with
NASA, but with NACA, the predecessor of NASA in, believe it or After not, 1958
he was with the Space Task Group from 1959 to 62. He came here as one of the
original founders of the Manned Spacecraft Center in 1962. He was the chief of
the flight directors during many of the Apollo missions and through the Apollo
years. He went on to serve in many other capacities at NASA and he is now the
head of the Rockwell International Operations here in Houston, Texas. On Glenn's
right is Cliff Charlesworth from I'm told originally Minnesota, I don't quite
believe it, but only briefly probably spent really much time in Mississippi,
came to the Mann Spacecraft Center also in 1962. prior to that he had been with
the Army at at KSC and it was it was Canaveral then or what okay I don't
remember back that far they
Cliff was a flight director here 1962 through 1970 and also since that time had
many other duties, including the assignment of deputy director of the then
-Johnson Space Center, and he retired from JSC last year. Next to Cliff, Jerry
Griffin. Oh, no, it's Jerry, yeah.
From Athens, Texas. Jerry went from Athens and spent an enormous amount of time
at Texas A&M. I think he's still receiving remedial instruction from there was a
flight director beginning with Gemini 11 having come to JSC in 64 and then
worked most of the Apollo missions if not I think probably all he was the lead
flight director on 12, 15 and 17. He went on to many other assignments since
that time including the director of the Johnson Space Center and he's currently
with, with a headhunting firm here in Houston, Texas. Not yet successful he's
not found gainful employment for me as yet.
Finally final panelist Steve Bales, believe me Steve is the youngest of the
group, he He was 20 years younger when Apollo landed. Weren't we all? But Steve
was in his early 20s at that time. He's originally from Iowa. Went to school in
Iowa. Came here immediately thereafter, I guess in 64. Was a flight controller
during Apollo known as Guido. So it was years before I knew his name actually
was Bales. He's now the Assistant Director, Program Support and the Missions
Operations Directorate. And with that I'll turn back to Glenn who was the lead
flight director on Apollo 7 that really got the Apollo missions started. Glenn.
Thank you, Joe.
I've been asked to start with Apollo 7 because it was the first manned flight
that we flew with the Apollo spacecraft. But perhaps more general than that, I
would talk about it in terms of the events that led up to Apollo 7. I think in
the minds of everybody here, up through and including Apollo 7, we were Earth
orbit people, we were figuring out how to fly a spacecraft. And I think starting
after Apollo 7 with the very dramatic Apollo 8 that Cliff will tell us about, we
began the assault on the Moon. leading up to Apollo 7. We had a number of things
happen in the program that were planned that don't get much attention and
haven't been talked about much in these events. They were a series of unmanned
shots that we had. We started off with a set of boilerplate vehicles out in
white sands out in the desert where we shot up solid rockets to about 30,000
feet, and then we blew them up and separated the command module and tested the
escape system. We probably had half a dozen shots out there in the desert. Some
worked, and some, by the way, were spooky as the devil because some of them
wanted to come back over the team that was launching them because of the winds.
So it was kind of an exciting time, and we learned something about the Apollo
escape system and how it was going to work, and how, indeed, we could trust it.
We never actually had to use it in a manned flight, but the Apollo escape system
was very reliable and proven by those tests. We had a series of unmanned flights
called 201 and 202, which were on the Saturn 1B, which was the smaller Saturn
rocket used for Earth orbital flights and used on Apollo 7. Those flights were
designed to test the heat shield. There was a lot we didn't know about the
aerodynamics and the heating that would go with a return from the Moon. And we
exercised those parameters on a couple of flights that we called 201 and 202 in
the mid-60s. And we had a lot of fun with those, because they were unmanned.
that we had a lot of things to do from the control center. Later on, we flew the
Saturn twice unmanned, Apollo 501 and 502, they also were very exciting flights.
And the first one went by the book, that was the one I had. The next one that
Cliff had almost came unglued a couple of times and it was kind of a scary
flight and I'm sure you'll hear more about that during the course of the day.
Before I then moved on to Apollo 7, I would say one more thing that I think is
important about the team and the way we got to the Moon. We had about ten or a
dozen Gemini flights, manned flights, two people in the cockpit. And when I look
back on that, I think what I realized is that the people who planned the Gemini
program in between the one man Mercury capsule and the Apollo mission where we
had to do so much other kind of work going to the Moon, they—it really was a
stroke of genius, because out of that program came not so much space hardware.
We use different hardware for Apollo. What came out of it was the operations
team. If you look at the astronauts that flew the Apollo missions, I think to a
man, almost to a man, they had all flown in Gemini. We did launches, rendezvous.
We didn't use the ejection seats in one very hairy sequence on the pad. We did
rendezvous every way there was to do it. We did EVAs, we docked with the chinas,
we rode around on chairs or at least we tried to the man-maneuvering chairs that
we use a derivative of on the shuttle today. When I look back on that and
realize all the different things that we did that were necessary to know how to
do when we went to the moon, I would say that we came into Apollo with the
flight crews and the ground crews like gangbusters. It's the word that occurs to
We came into the Apollo program with a set of people who had done almost
everything you could do in manned earth orbital flight. And, frankly, we were
cocky. We thought we know how to do this stuff, and we were looking forward in
this assault to the Moon. The events had a tragic and well-known halt with the
Apollo Fire, and in the 18 or so months that intervened between that fire and
the first manned flight of Apollo 7, a great number of changes were made to the
spacecraft, and again, the program came out of it much stronger than it
otherwise would have been in the race to the moon. To finish up this scenario,
then, as in extending our abilities to operate in earth orbit, we had to know
that the command service module, which was kind of the mother ship for the
Apollo missions, worked. Apollo 7 was flown in October, the fall of 1968 with
only one more year to go to meet the president's deadline. It was about a 10-day
flight in Earth orbit. We did everything we knew how to do to the Command
Service Module with the with the three astronauts and the ground people to test
it and out of that flight came eventually the plans for Apollo 8, actually a
little before the flight we decided we would do Apollo 8 which was the Frank
Borman trip around the moon on Christmas. But when I look back on it I see that
all of those events of the unmanned apollo flights the things that we did in
Gemini and the confidence that we gained in ourselves and our ability to master
problems we had we had problems out the galore on almost every Gemini flight out
of that kind of a background came the teams of people here and at the cape but I
will speak to the teams here the astronauts and the ground controllers in MCC,
and we really felt confident in going into Apollo. Apollo 7 was successful, as
you know. We tested the vehicle very well in Earth orbit, and then began the
exciting phase of the moon project where we began to test the really big
hardware, that is the new rocket and the lunar module, and eventually made our
assault on the moon in terms of completing the lunar landing mission with the
team of people that we had built during those early years, and that team of
people was just a crackerjack outfit. I have always been, and to this day, am
overwhelmed with pride at the opportunity I had to be a part of that team. So
with that, I'll turn it over to Joe and the rest of the guys to tell you after
we learned how to do things in Earth orbit what we did to go to the moon. Glenn,
thank you. To take us out from Earth orbit, Cliff? Yeah, I'd like to, start
before I get into Apollo 8, go back to the thing Glenn mentioned about the
second unmanned Saturn V launch. That flight occurred, I believe, in April of
1968.
I may have lost a year or two, but anyway. We had a few problems that day. we
lost two engines during the second stage in the flight. We also had pogo, which
nobody knew at the time because we didn't have real-time data on it, but we had
pogo to the extent that the crew wouldn't have been able to read the cockpit
gauges and would have probably required an abort. We had a number of other
problems in the spacecraft, but we did stagger into orbit, and I say that is
pretty an accurate description. We flew all over the sky, but we made it into
orbit and finally got settled down a couple orbits later to do the S4B burn to
drive the spacecraft up to come back in and simulate a lunar return and lo and
behold, it didn't light. So we aborted off of the S4B and burned the SPS engine
some tremendous long period of time and got all we could out of the flight but
but we didn't meet the objectives of the flight. So that, as a background, a
meeting occurred over at Marshall in the fall and I knew there was a meeting and
I got a phone call one night early to come out to Krav's office. He wanted to
see me. Well, my first thought was, oh boy, we're gonna fly another one of those
unmanned deals with a boiler plate on it and you're elected. That's what my
thought was. So I walked into his office fully expecting that, and he looked at
me and says, what do you think about taking Apollo 8 to the moon? And I said,
well, I haven't thought about that. But on thinking about it for a little bit,
it sounded like a fun thing to try to do. So he said, I want you to go get a
certain group of people together, and we need to go get some answers. So we
fanned out into a team and started looking at all the reasons why you couldn't
and all the reasons why you could. And this had been going on for some time in
the background. It was initiated by George Lowe and others. In any event, NASA
made that decision. And while Glenn was preparing to fly Apollo 7, we had a
small team off in the center, and many of you probably were on that team, trying
to figure out how to do that, because we had to accelerate a number of things
that we had not planned to do that early, primarily in the software world. Some
of the trajectory kinds of things. The spacecraft people had a heck of a job
trying to go figure out whether they could stamp this hardware, which we hadn't
even flown, really, ready to go to the moon. Well, all that came together, and
we did, in fact, make the commitment to go. As Glenn said, leading up to that,
we had pretty well proved we knew how to get into Earth orbit and operate there,
but this was the first time we were going to leave Earth orbit and go to places
three days away in terms of getting back if something happens. Not only that, we
were going to do it without the lunar module, so we would wind up with one
engine in lunar orbit to get us back home, which was eventually what we had to
do anyway, but it was a little bit spooky, if you sit and think about that for a
while. The preparations were difficult.
We spent a lot of hard hours working on that. But the day finally came and we
launched. launch phase was fairly uneventful, as I recall. And we did our two
orbits of preparation to get ready to go to the moon, and burned the S-IVB
successfully for TLI. And from that point on we had a different ballgame on our
hands. For example, in Earth orbit is most of you, or a lot of you know, you key
everything that you're trying to do on the console, wherever your console is, to
when is the next station pass? Because you've got to get, you've got about five
minutes to seven minutes to get information up and down to the spacecraft. Well,
here we were in a situation where we could talk to them anytime we want to. And
that was a strange thing. As a matter of fact, I thought about that during the
flight because I got to the point where you'd almost forget they were there
because, you know, you could talk to them anytime you wanted to. But anyway the
trip out was not uneventful and these guys, feel free to hop in here because you
were involved too. One of the things that we had decided to do clever devils
that we are was that we would test that engine on the way out to be sure it
worked right. And I think we were gonna and do a small out of plane maneuver
just to burp the SPS and be sure it was working right. Well, we did that and it
didn't work right. And it did not, and there was a little funny in the thrust
chamber pressure. So now we've got three days to look at data and talk to
everybody that you can find in the world to talk to, to satisfy ourselves that
we can indeed commit to put the spacecraft in lunar orbit, Knowing when we do
that, it has to work to come home. Well, there are an awful lot of smart people
today. Some of them are smarter than we were, I think. But there were some smart
people in it. And they gathered them, whether they be contractors at bowels of a
plant somewhere or the guy they've designed it, whatever it took, and satisfied
all levels of management at the Johnson Space Center and headquarters, that yes
indeed, we understood what was going on with the engine. Today, I couldn't
explain it, but that we were satisfied, it was okay to use it, and commit to
lunar orbit. You guys got anything to add to that? Some of you were involved in
looking at that problem. I would just add this to it, Cliff. In retrospect, that
was a major systems problem that had to be dealt with and was dealt with right.
And the situation we were faced with was there was the possibility that after
the first burn, we could have done another little one and then another little
one later to take it out. But we had to do those fairly quickly. So there was an
urgency to deciding whether we would try another test on the engine or not. And
it fell to me on my shift to deal with that problem. Well, at the same time, and
I don't even know if this is public knowledge, but at the same time, there was a
report from the crew that one of the crew members was ill. Was ill. So, this
seemed to attract all of the high management's brains. Everybody that I thought
I could get some help from, they were all off working on the fact that this guy
got sick, which I didn't really care about because there wasn't a bloody thing
that we could do about it that I knew of. So just be sick and be quiet about it,
for God's sake. I think he was. He didn't have it. So anyway, while everybody
else except the propulsion guys are over here worrying about this so-called sick
astronaut, it fell to me to deal with this issue of, well, are we going to burn
this thing another time and see if it works, and can we get it back and then do
a burn after that to get us back on the trajectory we wanted? We couldn't do too
much because we were running out of fuel if we did too much of that fooling
around him. If we were going to do anything, we had to do it in a big hurry. So
after a whole bunch of deliberations with the people that Cliff talked about, I
just took a deep breath, looked around one more time for the sick astronaut
committee, and they were nowhere in sight, and said, well, you're right, it
sounds all right to me. We're going to go ahead. And we didn't do any burns, and
we set the track for the Apollo 8 mission. But, boy, I sure felt like the Lone
Ranger for quite a while there. Well, can I add something to that? it so
happened that I was kind of riding a shotgun on Apollo 8 without a lot of detail
to do, so I was put on that sick astronaut committee for you. But one thing to
put in context here, we had never left the influence of Earth's gravity. And
there was a worry amongst the sick astronaut committee that, my gosh, this means
that there's something that we don't know about heading out of the Earth's
influence, and it's caused this astronaut to get sick. Well, as most of you
know, later on, we've had some of that almost on every flight. But it was a very
serious concern, and here was Pearl Glenn wrestling with all the technical
stuff. But we did get finally solved, and in fact, the astronaut did find a
little later, which is the typical pattern once you get into orbit. Go ahead.
Well, there's the advantage of being the lead flight director. You see, you just
delegate all those tough ones to these other guys. In any event, having waded
through all of that, we pressed on to the moon, and the next big milestone, of
course, was the first lunar orbit insertion burn, and the long wait, as they
were behind the moon, to find out what happened. Fortunately, everything went
very well, but I was one worried individual the first time they went behind the
moon. And I know Emil Schietzer wouldn't agree with me, but it always spook me
to scale at 60 nautical mile orbit to the diameter of the moon and see how near
that really is, and wanted to know whether you really figured that all out
right. We did. did. They came around the moon in just about the orbit that we
had predicted. And then they settled down to about, what was it? About 10
orbits, I believe, of extremely hard work. We really had some tired crewman on
our hands by the time they left lunar orbit. But we did that, we went ahead and
made the burn to head for home and there was a very relieved group of people and
I think Glen Luney was one of the most relieved when we came out from behind the
moon and indeed, that engine had worked very well. I would point out that, as an
aside, prior to going to the moon with the flights, so we had budgeted quite a
bit of propellant to do mid-course maneuvers because we didn't know how well we
were gonna be able to navigate, how well the systems were gonna work. As it
turned out, they worked very, very well and we had programmed mid-course
maneuvers, but they were very small, in some cases we skipped them all together.
And as I recall on 8, that's pretty well the situation we were in, both out and
back, and here it's the first time we've done it. So that was very encouraging.
We had some tired crewmen, as I said, coming back They had elected to try to
keep one man on watch at all times during that particular flight. And as we
knew, we proved once again that you can't really do that, because with the size
of the cockpits, somebody awake keeps the other guys from sleeping very well. So
they were pretty well beat by the time they got back to landing. Landing was
uneventful, as I recall, and I would just summarize Apollo 8. In my mind, I
think it was probably, as far as I'm concerned, the highlight of the Apollo
program. The commitment, the decision that was made to take that step was
fantastic in my mind. i don't believe you could make that decision these days
but to think that you're going to take the second spacecraft out of the chute
send it to the moon and commit to that sort of endeavor is uh it took a lot of
courage on some people's part to do that it was a great flight uh one of the
more thrilling things to me was the reading of the biblical passages when the
guys were around the moon at Christmas time which was something that they
initiated. Nobody knew they were going to do it but I can tell you this and
there were some tears in people's eyes when that was going on. It was a great
flight. I really enjoyed it. Anybody else? Cliff, thank you. Already I'm hearing
stories I didn't know about before I flew in space I'm glad I'm learning about
them now. Speaker 2 Jerry, well I'll kind of pick up where Cliff left there and
step quickly and kind of bring maybe me and Steve up to the Apollo 11 timeframe
when we landed on the moon and incidentally I agree with what Cliff said, the
Apollo 8 mission was kind of scary in a way and the reason that it was kind of
scary is that, and the courage that he mentioned to take that step, is that
everything we had done up to that point, with the possible exception of the EVA
that we did in Germany, we had built a very careful building block approach. Add
one thing at a time and take the next step. And Apollo 8 kind of jumped out of
that for a good reason. It pushed the system, I think, to go on faster and well
within constraints of safety. But it showed an ability to take risk and I think
that's where, when it's measured and when the gain is worth the risk, and I
think that's where Cliff and I really agree that those kinds of things are
getting harder and harder to do. But let me get to that building block approach.
Glenn kind of brought you through what built up to get us to Apollo 7. And for
the most part, Apollo itself had that same building block approach. After 8, the
next thing we did was Apollo 9, which was a low Earth orbit, back in Earth orbit
again, but we added an additional step to it. We added the lunar module. And the
lunar module and the command module docked together just like it would be at the
moon. We're in Earth orbit and we undocked them and separated them. First time
we'd ever done anything like that and had two people in the LEM, the lunar
module, without a heat shield. It was the first time we'd ever had anybody in
orbit that didn't have a protective heat shield to get down. And that was a
significant step. But we also proved that we could rendezvous, re-dock, transfer
the crew back in, discard the LEM, and re-enter the command module. Now that had
to be done to return from the moon. So that was another step in the process.
Apollo 10 came right after that. We had already been to the moon on Apollo 8 to
go into orbit. Apollo 10 was another let's go into orbit around the moon, but it
had the lunar module with it, which was at another additional step. And we did
the same thing in lunar orbit that something like we had done in earth orbit on
Apollo 9. We separated the crewmen, Tom Stafford, and Gene Cernan, went down
very low to the surface but didn't land. But they were close. In fact, some of
you may remember Gene Cernan saying we're really down amongst them, and that was
because he could see the mountains higher, or at least appearing to be higher,
like most airplane pilots think they're higher than they are, and they probably
weren't. But they really got down low, and then they didn't abort and came up
just like they would have had to in the event of an emergency. But this one was
planned. It wasn't planned to touch down. So here we built another block. They
came back up, rendezvoused with the command module. The command module did its
maneuver and brought them home. So you can see this step-by-step creeping up on
the problem. And by the time we launched Apollo 11, as Glenn said, the control
team was ready. The launch people at C.A.P.E. had been through it several times.
The astronauts were very well prepared. but there was a difference about 11. And
I think some of us probably, they were involved in it day-to-day, and I'd like
to get the reaction of these guys. I don't think we felt the importance of it
then, like we did in later years. This was, and I get back to that building
block process, it was just another, it was another step on a goal we had been
pursuing for so long that many of us didn't think of it I don't think as being
this profound step. We saw it as a great achievement that we wanted to make
happen, but we didn't understand maybe what the rest of the world, how they felt
about it. We started, I can remember, and I've thought about this a lot in the
last week or two because I've had people ask me about it and reporters wanting
to know what it was like. But I can remember, and although I, on Apollo 11, I
was just, I did a translunar shift, a sleep shift, virtually on the way out and
one on the way back because I was already assigned to Apollo 12 as the lead
flight director and was already starting to think about that flight. But I can
remember being, although we were on a high step and ready to do it, just like we
had on 10. I didn't feel a great difference in the start. I didn't have that
different feeling than I had from 10. And I took it kind of as one step. We've
done this. We've been here. We keep going. And I can remember very clearly where
the difference came. You know, Steve, for him, he'll probably talk about some of
the alarms that we got on Apollo. Probably started there for him. It didn't for
me because I knew he had that under control and it was a piece of cake. But what
I really remember is when Buzz said, we'll start to pick up some dust. And I can
remember to this day that I had the realization, he's talking about dust being
blown off the moon by the descent engine. And that was a step we had not taken
yet. And from there on, that flight had a great different feeling for me. And
then, surprisingly, once we got off the moon and back up to the lunar orbit
point, I felt, well, we've done this before and it should be okay. But that
interim period was that last step of that building block that we hadn't done
yet. So it put that great difference to it. I think the mission control team's
reaction to the landing is kind of understandable. While there was great
euphoria, I think probably individually, there was no wild screaming or anything
like that. In fact, Commandant Kranz was the flight director, and as those of
you that know Gene Kranz, and those of you who don't, I'll tell you a little bit
about him, probably one of the toughest disciplinarian kinds of guys in the
world, very extremely thorough, right on top of the situation. Gene Kranz was
and is a national asset, and he was just the right guy to be running the control
center that day. He kept a calmness to it. We had some abort opportunities
planned there early. I think we called them T1 and T2. We didn't know if, when
the limb touched down, one of the gears might start to sink, and we might have
to punch off immediately. But we did also have some windows pointed out where we
would do these systems checks quickly, and if there was an opportunity to abort,
we had the command module in the right space for them to get back to it. It was
a very business-like atmosphere, and kind of a calm sort of thing. And on a
personal note, as soon as we touched down, and I realized we had done it, and it
was all very exciting, I had started thinking about Apollo 12, actually before
they even had done their EVA, because we had already started talking about what
we were going to try to do on Apollo 12, which was a pretty exacting test. But
that built on, and the control center throughout that entire period stay was a
very subdued professional kind of atmosphere. I can remember and while I can't
tell you exactly what it said I can remember one humorous note that since I was
kind of working the night shifts I came in one night and one of our flight
controllers had put up on one of the big screens about the size of this thing
over here some comment not too kind about the Russians And other than that, I
didn't see any frivolity in the control center throughout that whole period.
Great, great opportunity and a great day for the country to think about now 20
years later. One final thought. And we were talking about this as we were
standing up here before this started today. One of the things that just amazes
me about that whole period leading up to the lunar landing, and even now, to
some degree, was the youthfulness of that control team. If I'm not mistaken, I
think at that point the man to my left here was in his mid-30s, and he was the
oldest flight director. I won't pin it down to it. I think he was the oldest
flight director, even older than Kranz.
But we were all a bunch of young people. Steve Bales in his 20s. And when I
think about marshalling that kind of energy and vigor in the interest that was
shown, and we still see signs of that today, obviously. We did have a team of
management on top of us, some of them older than that, that were very, very
supportive and very visionary and very, very good. But I think back to the young
people that made that happen and kind of marvel that it could have been done by
people so young. We had – Glenn and I have talked about this. We probably had
more responsibility at about age 30 than most people will have in a lifetime.
And we had that opportunity because NASA gave it to us. Joe? Dr. Terry, thank
you. Steve, you're kind of the clean up hitter, and feel free to correct what
any of these old timers have intended to say. Dr. I had to correct them all the
time when we're flying. Just continue on. I'm actually here representing Gene
Krantz. Gene is on his way to Washington today and I think I'd like to say, talk
about two things. because he would want to talk to you about two things. One was
Apollo 9. Jerry mentioned that. It was a very difficult mission, and Gene was
the lead. Very difficult because it was sandwiched between probably the greatest
mission of the Apollo program, Apollo 8. If you didn't work on Apollo 8, I think
you had heartache. I certainly didn't, and at 8th... Excuse me. I just want to
let that go without commenting to the audience. You have to understand, Mr.
Krantz, whatever flight he was working on was the toughest flight we've ever
had. Yeah. Go ahead. And on the other side was Apollo 10, where we were going to
take the two vehicles and go right down among them, as Jerry said. And here's
Apollo 9, and it's going to stay in Earth orbit. And it's going to do things
that are very, very important. We've never checked out the rendezvous systems.
We've done rendezvous in Earth orbit. but we've never used the systems, however,
that we're actually going to use on the moon to get the two ships back together.
And that was a mission that it took someone very special, I believe, to keep
inspiring the team and keep them going and be just as excited about Apollo 9 as
they would be about Apollo 10 and 11. And I think it's important that you all
realize that between those two outstanding missions, there was Apollo 9, and it
was just as essential as a building block to go on to 11 as the others were. The
other thing I would like to do is take you back through Apollo 11, the landing
and the activation, and then leave it on the moon and then maybe turn it over to
Glenn Lenny, who actually got them back off the moon and back up to the command
module. We'd done a number of things in Apollo 8. Apollo 8 was very essential to
us because we had a lot of unknowns about how we were going to navigate, Not
just the fact we were going to come so close to the moon, but we were really
precisely having to put down a ship later when we were going to fly Apollo 11
within a few miles, within less than a mile of a precise point on the moon we
wanted to put it. And the moon is not a nice spherical place to navigate. It has
concentrations all over. In fact, they call them mass cons for short. And they
affected our orbit. And we weren't quite sure what techniques we were going to
use to actually do the final targeting for the landing module. Apollo 8 taught
us how to do that and we actually, were able to use those things on 11. The
activation of 11 went so well because we had practiced it on 10 and a new thing
and a new part of the game was the actual descent as Gerry talked about. Now go
back to a personal moment. before the final descent and the crew was still on
the back of the moon the timeline ran we would come around the side of the moon
we'd have 15 minutes to look the spaceship and then we were going to fire the
engine and we were going to land ten minutes before acquisition of signal Gene
Kranz gave a speech the General Patton would have liked to have given laughter
and I can almost remember it chapter and verse laughter but the one point that
will always stay in my mind is he says, I don't care how we do, we've trained,
we know where the best there is and whatever happens, I'm going to stand behind
you. And if you think that doesn't mean a lot to a group of flight controllers
in a point like that, you've just never been in that situation. It really means
everything to you. But then right after that, he says, I'm going to lock these
doors.
Now, I never was sure if he meant he was going to keep everybody else out or he
was going to keep everybody else in, but he locked the doors. During the actual
descent there were at least five times when we could have stopped. And we were
very lucky, I think. We were lucky and we were prepared. But in the end we
managed to make it through. Let me just go through the sequence a bit. We came
around the side of the moon. We were expecting nice, clear communications and
every other piece of data was garbage. We about had rough communications. There
was a lot of noise. We couldn't hardly hear the crew, and the telemetry was
there one minute and it wasn't there the next minute. And right away, Gene has
to decide if we have enough data to keep going on. Fortunately, that's what we'd
been trained to do. The simulation people had driven us right to that point many
times, and Gene pulled his flight control team, and collectively they tried to
tell him what we were seeing, what we weren't. He made a judgment that we had
enough information to keep going on. We start the descent and right away we find
out we have another problem. Even though we'd done the very best we could on
targeting, our ability to predict where the landing module was going to be was
in error. It was in error about four miles. The guys were coming in about four
miles down range from where they thought they were, from where we'd hoped we
were targeting them. We find that out, and not only that, we have a velocity
error in altitude, about two-thirds of the way to where we would have to abort.
We're sweating this one out for a couple of minutes, and during the descent, the
way we set up the 11, the crew actually rolled the vehicle around over about
four or five minutes into the descent, landing radar locked on, corrected the
velocity problem. There wasn't anything we were going to do about the downrange
problem. We're through that. We're starting to relax. Relax, if you can call it
that. And the crew says, I've got this computer alarm. There is no way you're
supposed to be getting computer alarms during DNC. There's absolutely no way
you're supposed to. They're put in there to debug, check out, and do everything
else, but they are not put in there to that kind of alarm to have during DNC.
Fortunately, again, our training came to our aid. We had been given those kinds
of cases a couple of weeks before, and, in fact, when we were given that case in
the simulation, I was ready to write it off and say, what are we doing spending
our time on this kind of nonsense because it's not realistic and I've got other
things to worry about. and Gene said you will not write that off. You will form
a team. You will get with the folks and you will go through every possible
alarm, I don't care if they're realistic or not. And you will make up a game
plan on how you're going to play it. So, due to the training and due to Gene's
insistence, we had a game plan, and it was pretty good. Now, the experts in this
case, this alarm happened to say computers got too much to do in this last
second and the experts had been of some help but not a great deal of help in
this one. and they said, look, this isn't supposed to happen. We talked about
that for an hour. After we got them through that, after they told us for an hour
it wasn't ever supposed to happen, we said finally got through to them that,
yeah, but it has happened. What should we do? They said, well, it's a very bad
situation.
But if it doesn't happen too much, if it doesn't have time too much, you're sort
of left to come up with your own judgment about what you should do next. And our
own judgment had been, it wasn't happening that often, and everything else
looked fine. Navigation looked fine. Guidance looked fine. No more alarms. And
we made the decision to go on. Now, the crew was distracted by the alarm so much
that they were apparently, and at this time I didn't know this, they were
looking inside the cockpit, and they were trying to figure out maybe he'd left a
switch out of configuration, what have you. And by the time that Neil looked up
and saw where he was going, and this 4-mile error that I told you about had
propagated, and in fact, we weren't coming down in this nice, smooth place we
were supposed to come down in. We were coming down in the boulder field. And he
is flying the ship, as he'd been trained to do over the boulder field. All the
time, the gas is getting lower and lower. And if you listen to the other ground,
you hear this 60 seconds. That meant that's what it really means, 60 seconds,
and you're going to have to leave. And then you hear 30 seconds. And the same
thing. And then there's a long pause even then. After the 30 seconds, we're
getting down to the 17, 15 second frame. And most people don't realize that, I
believe. We're about 15 seconds, give or take a couple, from having to stop the
descent. And then the famous, I hear, I see the dust, crew touches Dan. And my
personal reaction was one of intense relief and gratitude. And then it was one
of wonder, because the crew said something I'd never heard them say before. All
during a training, they called themselves the Eagle. Never used any word but
eagle. And then on the day of January 20th at 3 o'clock in the afternoon, they
used the word Tranquility Base. And that changed the mission entirely for me
because we really had a base on the moon, a forward outpost, if you will. And
that was, to me, the most dramatic event and the most dramatic saying that was
done during that mission. And we still had a lot of problems. We really didn't
know where we were. I mean, clearly we knew within some diameter of where we
were on the moon, but we'd landed down stream, didn't know where we were, we
were gonna have to find out before we took off the next day. And we left all
those problems with Glenn Lunny, who had about 10 different sources to tell him
where we were on the moon, I don't think any agreed, and he finally decided, and
we kept going, so I'll turn that back to him. Go ahead. Right by the interstate,
Steve. I recall once going to one of those change-and-shift press conferences,
and I was having a terrible time trying to explain anybody that could figure out
how to go to the moon and land didn't know where we were on the moon. But that
was the situation for a while. Well, once Mr. Krantz and Mr. Bales and Co. and
Mr. Armstrong and Aldrin got the machine on the surface, we set out to do
something else that we hadn't done before. We had played around, I shouldn't use
that word, we had done EVAs in Gemini, but of course that's under weightlessness
environment. Here we're in 1,6-G. So there were a lot of things that we needed
to learn about that, how well can you move around, how fast can you move, and so
forth and so on. And let me put in one story before I get into the surface
activity itself. There had been a raging debate go on for months amongst the
doctors and the rest of the world about when we land on the moon, what are we
going to do next? That is, are we going to take a rest cycle with the crew, or
are we going to go ahead and prepare to get out? Well, the doctors, in their
judgment, felt that certainly we should have them go to sleep. There were a
number of us who felt that that was going to be very difficult for anybody to
do, having landed on the moon for the first time in the world, to immediately go
to sleep without some help. So anyway, the doctors won the debate, and it was
baseline that we would in fact have a sleep period before we did the EVA. now
they pointed out several of them Mr. Griffin has point out that I'm the elder of
this group and I was also clever enough to believe that they weren't going to do
that when they got there so we had prepared for that eventuality also that if a
decision was changed and they decided to go ahead and do the EVA we'd be ready
to support well sure enough not too long after they had landed and got all the
switches taken care of and settled down a bit, we get this radio message that
Houston, we think we'd like to go ahead and do the EVA. And I'm smiling, you
know, because I knew that was going to happen and I'm kneeling the doctors. And
of course we said yes. Well, the only thing in my mind that I did wrong was I
had been up like everybody else for this whole preparation for descent and lunar
descent. And now I had fixed myself where now I had to pull a whole shift on the
moon. So it made for a long day. But anyhow, it took a while, being the first
time we did it, and the limb was very cramped to get all that gear on and
checked out. And as I recall, it seemed like forever to get the cabin to finally
depress to the point where they could open the hatch that last two-tenths of a
PSI or something. It seemed like it took forever. But Neal got out. And I recall
my own reaction when he got out and onto the surface of the moon and looking at
it on that TV, I said, this just doesn't seem real. You know, and here I am
sitting here in the middle of all this and it just didn't seem real. But in
fact, it was. They set about to do their job and as usual, we had over
-programmed the timeline. We had put more stuff in there than three people could
probably do. That they did the best they could. They also had to stop and take a
phone call from somewhere down here in the White House area. And we had a
carefully laid out plan that we were gonna have... I believe there were two
types of samples, documented samples which took quite a bit of time, and what we
call grab samples where you just grab rock. Now we only had about two hours and
30 minutes programmed to be out on the moon for this first flight. and again we
were playing it very conservatively we we could have stayed longer but we felt
let's do what we have to do that is of significance which was deploy a
scientific package and gather some samples and get back in while we're ahead so
I think the guys did a fantastic job of doing the best job they could in a new
environment in a very compressed timeline and with the distractions which were
not of their doing I still think they came out of it with a with really a wealth
of information and they did a they really did a great job the lunar surface
thing again was entirely new to us it we'd spent many hours practicing it's
difficult to simulate that but but we we could in some ways, and we even had
practice astronauts that would get on the phone with us and we'd play the what
-if games on the moon, just like we would do in Rendezvous or any other
operation. Again, we spent about two hours and 35 minutes, I believe it was. I
was very, very relieved to see that cabin start to pressurize, to get them back
in there. At that point I felt like we had done it because I had complete
confidence that we could in fact rendezvous with the mother ship and we had done
those things before and I was very confident that we had it made at that point I
was always very nervous when they were outside the spacecraft in Earth orbit or
on the moon because when you stop and think that that one seems like flimsy suit
you guys were and unluckily as a flight director I seem to manage to have to
terminate most of the EVAs in Gemini so I was kind of nervous about that whole
operation. So I was very glad when they got back in and pumped that cabin up and
you had two very, very tired astronauts at that point. And a heck of a lot of
tired ones on the ground too. And with that point I think we did in fact manage
to get them to sleep for a while. and Glenn's shift was to get him back to the
command service module.
Getting ready for ascent and lunar orbit rendezvous. There was one thing about
ascent. It was there are no other alternatives. The ascent engine, the
separation sequence from the descent stage, which represented sort of a platform
from which to launch the ascent stage, was just one way. There was just one way
to do it, and it had to work. For that reason, the ascent engine got a lot of
attention, like a lot of other things did, but a lot of attention, and there was
a great deal of worry about it, et cetera, et cetera, in terms of getting off
the moon. For me and probably for the control center, for the flight controllers
in the MCC, our job is kind of outlined by what decisions might we have to make.
For example, during the launch phase, There's a possibility of all kinds of
abort decisions or other kind of decisions have to be made. And it kind of loads
you up with a set of possibilities, a set of options, a set of dealing with
them. Countdowns are like that too. But for us, at least and especially for me
on the lunar surface, we didn't have any choices to make. We just had to get the
thing all set up right, be sure all the navigation was right, and then go for
it. There weren't any decisions to make. The thing had to work. And that's what
happened. and the asset engine worked fine, and when we finished with it we were
in lunar orbit. At that time, I felt we were on the downhill side of the
mission, because this team of people here and the astronauts, we had done EVA
every way from Sunday, not EVA, rendezvous. Every way from Sunday during the
Gemini program, we did them upside down, backwards, left handed, right handed,
and we really felt like we knew how to do that, and besides that we had Buzz
Aldrin on board who had invented the major part of the techniques that we used.
So we were very confident about our ability to do the lunar orbit rendezvous.
Apollo 10, of course, had added to that in the lunar environment. So getting
through the SN phase was just no choice, no decisions to make, just hang on to
the console for six minutes and pray. And we did that. The lunar orbit
rendezvous It went well. And then, the guys started transferring back into CSM
for the eventual return back to this planet that we live on, called Earth. Thank
you. We've gotten ourselves back into lunar orbit. Do you want to continue the
mission, or do you want to start skipping around to other missions? Jerry? Well,
I think it's probably time to skip around a little bit.
understandably we have focused on Apollo 11 because that's what we celebrate at
this time, but I think what we did after 11 in a very summary way can just say
was nothing short of fantastic. We went back, you know one flight we aborted,
and let me tell you about in keeping with what Steve said about Gene Kranz it
was the mission that he was the lead on, it was always the toughest. The really
tough mission was Apollo 12.
That's because I was the lead flight director on Apollo 12. And it was an
interesting flight... It was kind of an example of... Every one of these flights
had a very... Every one of them we could sit and talk to, particularly this
crowd, up here and some of you could talk about every one of these flights in
great detail, because they all had their own personality. Apollo 12 is the one
you may remember. We got hit by lightning about 50 seconds after launch. With an
Aggie flight director. Yeah, Cliff says with an Aggie flight director.
And we handled that. We thought we were going to, I thought we were going to
have to abort. Thank God the Saturn V kept working and got us into Earth orbit.
It was a very interesting mission in that we went and landed, did a pinpoint
landing next to the Surveyor spacecraft which had been sent up there unmanned
seven years earlier, and the crew of Conrad and Bean actually got out and got
some pieces off of that spacecraft. And picking up on what Steve said, with our
uncertainties about the Moon's homogeneity, the idea that it's not a good sphere
until you know where the mass cons are, and we weren't sure we could do it. Now,
I was the lead flight director for that flight, and Cliff Charlesworth did the
landing phase, and he's never forgiven me, but we had a custom in those days
when you were lead flight director the first time, you got the NASA Exceptional
Service Medal, and I got my medal, and the salutation lauds me for performing
the pinpoint landing that Clifford was the flight director for, and he's never
forgiven me for it. One of these days, I'm going to give you that medal just so
you can have it. But anyhow, 13 turned out to be a real excitement because of
the problem that we had with the oxygen tank blowing up. On the way to the moon,
we had to abort. 14, 15, 16, all had their problems and their successes. And I
think celebrating Apollo 11 like we are at this time is a great time to reflect
on every one of those missions because it's the only time that we can talk about
the whole program and kind of celebrate together because we don't celebrate
those other flights the way we did this one. But I just wanted to get that plug
in there for those other missions that came after. Thank you, Jerry. Thank you,
Jerry. I'm going to jump in here for just a moment and say you've heard a lot
from Cliff and from the others about the moral strength and courage that was
required on the part of the flight directors and their team of literally
hundreds of individuals, many of whom, most of whom, were very young to make the
decisions necessary to go to the moon and successfully carry it out. And I'll
share a story with you that actually comes, it's a personal story, but it comes
from that time. And my son was two and three years old in those years. And one
day he was discovered in the kitchen with a large box of dirt and pebbles from
our backyard, which he had dumped on his mother's kitchen. and I inquired of
three-year-old son what he was doing, dumping this dirt in his mother's kitchen
and he informed me that it was not dirt, it was earth rocks. He had been
collecting earth rocks.
And I stopped. It was a good ploy because it really stopped me for a moment. I'd
never heard the term earth rocks before But it made sense, and he, as far as I
know, had invented that, as had every other young person his age, had invented
that during those years. Well, because of his years, I also, from time to time,
would read bedtime stories, and one of his favorite was entitled James and the
Giant Peach, and there may be one or two of you in the audience who's not
immediately familiar with that book. And it starts out, its first sentence is,
At the age of six, James was at the London Zoo with his parents when a crazed
rhinoceros escaped and ate his parents. You may feel sorry for his parents.
Don't. Their problems were over in 15 seconds. But James had to go live with
his, and so on. The story begins. There's an underlying meaning in that, I
think, and this feeling is shared by all astronauts, that if and when something
goes wrong on a space mission, knock on wood that it doesn't, the astronauts'
problems could be over in a few seconds, but the responsibility lies with the
flight directors and their team and that's very well recognized by all of us in
the business. And the stories that we all, including myself, are listening to
today are based on that thought, that philosophy, that realization. That does
not mean that all the stories are true, but Steve, you'd mentioned to me earlier
that there is a handbook that all flight directors and their team uses called
Mission Rules, and one could naively think that there's nothing to this business
of being a flight director, you just look up in the owner's manual, the mission
rule book, what to do in this case or that case. And when you learn, though,
that the mission rule book is, how many rules did we operate with in Apollo?
What did you get? It was about that thick. And Steve said he had a rule he was
very fond of known as 1-6. And maybe you could explain something about the way
the rules work and the mission control and so on. These guys are all forgotten.
See, they never read their mission rules. I was the only one who had to read
them. These guys were flight directors. But they do know this rule. And it says,
I can paraphrase it. I gave it to Joe. But paraphrase, it says, the flight
director at his discretion may take any action needed to conduct the successful
completion of a mission, which means that if the flight director so decides, he
changes those rules to make the thing work out right. And that's the
responsibility that these three gentlemen have had and over the years and have
conducted.
I said I have a number of questions to ask. Before I start, I wonder if maybe we
could start to have one or two from the audience. Yes, right there in the middle
and speak as loudly as we can. We won't use microphones. By the way, once we
start to tell stories, believe me, we can continue until this time tomorrow, and
maybe we will. You're welcome to stay until about 1.30, maybe a little before 2,
and we'll more or less officially break up. Those of you who have other things
to do right now, we won't be at all offended if you go on and do those other
things. However, there will not be a movie starting in here in 15 minutes. We're
going to stay here for a little while longer. Question right in the middle.
The question was, we had some problems with docking in Apollo, was it Apollo 11?
I believe that was 14. I think we did have a little bump on 11. 14 we had a
problem. I think one of them was came before the module was picked up for the
first time, and the whole mission was in jeopardy because it wasn't programmed
to be inside. That was Apollo 14. We had a problem when they separated and came
back in to get the LM out of the S4B adapter. They couldn't dock. But Glen
thinks he's right, that we did have a glitch on 11. Don't remember. Oh, no,
that—you're thinking of Apollo 10. In Apollo 10, we had the sequence of lunar
orbit rendezvous between what the spacecraft were called Charlie Brown and
Snoopy, as a matter of fact, with Tom Stafford and Gene Cernan in the lunar
module and there was a violent maneuver it wasn't exactly around the time of
docking it was a misplaced switch and when they went into a configuration that
tested this which it was in the wrong place and the spacecraft did something
funny leading to some of Gene Cernan's most famous profanity.
You know one thing that that is important here though and and I saw this on a TV
show the other night that did purport some kind of wild maneuver were on 11, and
I didn't...when I saw it, I couldn't remember that. So, I don't know if that's
where you may have picked that up, but, but I don't think it happened. Not on
that flight. John Gallagher Right here.
The question was what decisions were required? what discussions held in the case
of Apollo 12, meaning after it had been hit by lightning and so on? Dr. John
Conrad Let me quickly set the stage for you. We launched in about fifty seconds
after launch. We didn't know at the time we'd been hit by lightning, although
while we were still under power flight, Pete Conrad said, I think we may have
been hit by lightning, and later photos and analysis shows we probably were.
this already, a big zorch, I mean a big one. What it did is that it, we provided
power to the spacecraft by fuel cells that provided the power. And those were
connected to the distribution system through a series of circuits that, in fact,
I think, even had some relays in it, mechanical relays, and when the lightning
hit, it knocked all of those fuel cell power off of the main distribution system
inside the spacecraft. So the spacecraft immediately, all the lights dimmed, all
the warning lights came on, and the only thing that was providing any power at
all were the entry batteries, which were storage batteries that we also put on
for launch. Had those batteries not been on, I mean, it would have gone dark.
But they were able to have enough power to communicate and to see their caution
and warning.
Thank god! As I said earlier, the Saturn was steered by a thing called the
Instrumentation Unit, which was a separate guidance system down in the Saturn,
and it was not effected. So, as soon as it happened…I know the first thing I
looked at were the engines to see if they were still burning. They were. And the
trajectory that these guys were watching was going in the right direction. We're
still climbing uphill. But my immediate thought was, we may have to abort, but
if we do, let's don't get panicky about it. Let's do it as high up as we can to
make sure everything has enough time to work.
Young ECOM by the name of John Aaron who now runs the space station project here
at JSC had seen a case similar. Going back to some of the simulation work that
had been done, it wasn't exactly the same but he had seen a case in a simulation
that he wondered about and he wondered if this might be the case that he had
seen. The worst thing that happened to us on the ground was we lost all our
data. It absolutely went to garbage. So we had no telemetry so we couldn't help
them until we got something back so that we could see what was going on. John
made a switch call, I'll never forget it, SCE-to-aux for those of you that are
electronics, on the products of signal conditioning equipment to auxiliary. And
that set up a different signal conditioning equipment for this radio data that
would come back to us. We asked a crew to go to that auxiliary position, they
did. This was probably 40 to 45 seconds after we'd been hit by lightning. They
went to the auxiliary position and voila, the data was restored. We could see
all of the telemetry data at that point. the crew was still, and would tell you,
they were, they had no idea what to do because they had no data either. So, but
on doing that, then John Aaron could see that the fuel cells were not providing
any power to this distribution system. So the first thing he said was, have them
reset the fuel cells, which was just a momentary switch on each of three cells.
And as soon as he did, the spacecraft lights came back up, a lot of the caution
and warning, which was primarily power oriented, those lights went out, and
about the only thing we had as a problem at that point was that the guidance
system, which these guys depended on in the lunar in, in the command module, had
lost its reference and it was tumbling and so forth. We went on into orbit, and
as I recall, what did we take, two revs before we went TLI? I think we, two revs
before we'd go trans lunar, we actually extended a rev. and to give us a little
more time to look at the systems to see if we could, if we were in good enough
shape to go on. We got the platform realigned so that we had a good guidance
system. We did some checks, checking it to drift characteristics, and it looked
OK. And then I think John Aarons was the guy that really, that really made this
happen. He said, you know, if we would go through a check very similar to what
we would have to do for trans-earth injection, that is to say if we could verify
essentially the checklist to do the burn that would get us out of lunar orbit
and headed back home, we ought to be ready to go. We don't know what's happened
to the limb. But at least we could verify that the CSM is okay and that we could
get into orbit and out of orbit at the moon. So that's what we did. We took an
extra rev to do it in Earth orbit and we went through a checklist. It could be
powered up gimbal motors and all that kind of stuff to make sure that the SPS,
the service propulsion system, in the back of the command service module was
right. We did every electronic check. We checked all the alternate circuits on
comm and all that. But all worked fine. And at that point, we kind of looked at
each other and said, let's do it. Let's go on to the moon. I never will forget
Chris Kraft. One statement to you. When he walked, we were in the middle of all
of this. And some of you have seen it real. And some of you have seen it on
television and others. People got headsets on. They're kind of haggard. And
they're walking around. They're looking around. And in the middle of all this,
Kraft came down and he put his hand on my shoulder and he said, young man, we
don't have to go to the moon today. And that's all he said. And I said, yes,
sir.
But we had the world turned on, the program offices and all that. That's the way
the thing did, the plant, the contractors back at the plant all got involved in
this thing. And it finally, I guess the final decision was we could see no
reason not to go. And let me add the final footnote. After that problem, it's
very much like the Apollo 14 docking problem which I was also involved in. After
that problem it was probably the smoothest mission we've ever had. We had
virtually no other problems. It seemed like every mission had at least one place
where you'd say, good gosh, how could we ever have had that happen? But after
that Apollo 12 went ticky-boo. It was really good. Jerry, I'd like to add
something to that. I sat in a control center watching Jerry and his team go
through this, and one of the things that occurs to me now, and perhaps did then,
I might not have thought of it this way, was that this country has always been
very blessed. It seems to spit out the right man at the right time or the right
woman at the right time to meet some kind of a challenge, and we've been very
blessed in that regard in the 200-some years this country's been around. Apollo
12, in my opinion, there is not one other individual in the entire world who
could have made the call at the e-comm council other than the man who was there,
John Aaron. He's the only man that I knew of that was able to put that together
in the time he did and make exactly the correct call, having prepared himself to
do so. It was not luck. I would say the same of Jerry and his whole team. They
were very calm and very professional. We replayed that lightning strike, and it
scared to live in the Jesus' eyes of this when we saw this thing coming out of
the tail of the rocket. And the flight group, they settled down and got things
back underway, and Jerry alluded to it here on the Earth orbit stuff, but it was
a funny feeling in the control center, and we talk in terms of platforms and
computers and fuel cells and control systems and a lot of complicated stuff, But
when they got done with this checklist, and the spacecraft and the rocket looked
to be okay, we just kind of looked around at each other. The decision was made
on the basis of, well, what are we gonna do now? This thing works. So, as long
as we're up here, let's get on with it. And it was kind of a... It was almost
typical of the decisions. It was characteristic of the decisions that were made
in the Apollo program, and that is, yeah, they're a risk with anything we do.
Let's get on with it. And that's the kind of decision Jerry's team made. And it
was a pleasure to watch him. I have a comment on Twil. Okay, okay. You gonna
talk to me about that medal? No, no.
Shortly after they were on the lunar surface, we lost the TV camera. Now, I
thought about that a lot afterwards. And I said, of all of the astronauts that I
know, that couldn't have happened to the more perfect crew because we had Pete
Conrad on the surface of the moon with no TV. But yet, with his running
commentary and his whistling and humming and so forth, it was almost as good as
having a TV. Yeah, another thought that just came to mind about 12 that was
interesting. Some of you know, as I said earlier, I went to A&M and Al Bean went
to University of Texas, And we had a pretty good run in battle going on, good
-naturedly. Two things happened on that flight that were both kind of gotchas
from one Aggie to an old T-sipper. One is that one morning I woke him up by
playing the Aggie War Hym to him, which neither one of them have ever forgiven
me for. But the other thing, as it's back to this TV thing, Al Bean was the guy.
Remember, it got pointed at the sun. And he had the watch at that time, and it
burned it out. So I never let him hear the end of that one either. Anyway, one
of the footnotes to that thing about John Aaron that picks up on something I
said earlier, here was this guy making this critical call, and I agree with
Glenn, I think Cliff and Steve Wood, probably Joe too, that he was the right guy
to be there and the right guy to do it. May have been the only one, I don't
know, but if I recall correctly, I think he was 25 years old, graduate of
Northeast Oklahoma, harm boy. Interesting twist. I've got to continue on Apollo
12, but it's just a footnote to these stories that occurred two missions later.
The command module pilot on 12 was Dick Gordon. He did not go down to the moon
service, but I would guess he had the brunt of the checklist to come home. He
was one busy astronaut during that time. And he probably was put on the banquet
circuit after that mission for Apollo 13. I'm not sure where Dick was, but out
of just coincidence, he and I were together to see the launch of Apollo 14 in a
very remote viewing area in Florida, only a handful of people around. Dick was
one of them. I was there. And because of the lessons learned from 12, of course,
the mission rule and everything else was changed with regard to when do we
launch Saturn 5s with regard to clouds overhead. I can't cite it the way Steve
could, but we were a bit more conservative. Apollo 14 came, counted down,
everything was beautiful, it was a gorgeous day. Almost not a cloud in sight.
And right as it came to the crucial minutes, a little puffy white cloud, like
out of Casper the Ghost movie, came, floated right over the launch escape tower
of that rocket. And the launch was held. And I don't not know how long it was
held. I would guess 10 minutes or so, but every minute, Dick Gordon would look
out, shout to the wind, shake his fist, and shout, chicken crew, chicken crew.
Now, is that what he said? Or words to that effect.
Jerry you mentioned there was probably not a mission that went by Apollo mission
that didn't have one major event we finished 12 would someone want to start with
13 or shall we come back to that later it definitely had a major event well
Apollo 13 was the flight that we had a problem about two-thirds of the way to
the moon when a tank blew up, and we, in effect, lost the mothership, the
command service module, and had to move into the lunar module and bring it back.
I would perhaps wait to discuss, if anybody wants to, the technical details of
that, but an observation, a set of observations, perhaps, is that by that time,
1970, April 1970, As a matter of fact, it was April 13th, Apollo 13. We should
have known better. It was Friday. Friday, also. Joe Allen was in the control
center. My God, how much could be against us?
When I look at the events of the flight were frantic. I came on duty. The tank
blew up when Gene was on duty, and he stayed on for about an hour trying My team
came on. We stayed on for about 10 hours. And we had an absolutely superb flight
control team. We had the support of everybody in the United States that works on
the space hardware. Every factory was energized to help us. and I look back on
that flight, and I realize that if one had gone out of his way to try to script
a case where we would come as close as possible to losing the spacecraft and
losing the crew, they could not have come up with a more testing or a more
trying case than the actual flight of Apollo 13. And the response of the people
who had worked together for about a decade by that time, the people on the
ground, the program offices, the engineering teams, and the astronauts and the
confidence that we had in each other. It just comes out as almost, for me, a
brilliant shining light, although it was something of a failure. Someone might
call it a failure. But for us in the operations business, it was the maximum
test. I mean, it was an ultimate test of our ability to deal with the problem
and deal with it successfully. And the team of people that lived and worked here
at the center handled that test with grace and dignity. They handled it with
calm professionalism. They were absolutely outstanding. I mean, I look back on
it, and I think the 80-some hours we worked after that. If we never worked any
other 80 hours in our whole life, and they paid us for the rest of our life, we
were a little bit underpaid. It really was a terrific team effort, and it really
was inspiring. It was inspiring to see how calmly and how professionally and how
accurately and how well people did with what was an extreme ultimate test
survival of a crew in the spacecraft. And the people here came through. That
gangbusters team I talked about earlier, had 10 years of experience. It came
through. This team was right there.
questions about 13 or anything else for that matter yes
the question is about the oxygen supply aboard the command module and the
service module and lunar module on Apollo 13 and how was that supply stretched
Those of you who are not that familiar with the mission may not know that the
oxygen tanks that fed the command module actually exploded. So a good portion of
the oxygen was consumed in the explosion. We had a small tank of oxygen in the
command module outside of the cryogenic tanks, a small tank that was called a
surge tank used mostly for entry when the cryogenic tanks were gone away. But in
addition to that, we had a lot of oxygen available for breathing. in the lunar
module. So the lunar module oxygen was really the source that kept the crew
alive during the 80-some hours that it took to return. The limiting parameter
that we were dealing with really was the water that we had on board the lunar
module, which was used for cooling, because it was built for a certain amount of
stay time on the moon with a certain power configuration, and we extended it a
great deal in order to bring off all of the maneuvers in the power-up that we
had to have in the linear module to carry this crew and command service module
back to earth. So the limiting parameter was the cooling. We were struggling to
keep the electrical loads low and therefore the requirement for cooling water
low. And it was the thing that always taxed us in terms of what option should we
exercise. Options to burn the engine usually took a lot of power for the
guidance and control system and the propulsion systems, etc. So we were like
misers when it came to metering out the checklist in terms of what we were going
to do because of our concern for using up the LEM water. It was the critical
parameter for the LEM. The next big critical parameter was this poor old command
module was frozen cold. We'd never turned it off like that before. And Gene's
team had to get offline and figure out how to activate and bring the command
module back in, and the rest of us who stayed working the shifts in the flight
knew that Gene's team, I think Steve worked on that team, to figure out how to
get the command module activated. So we had plenty to worry about, but oxygen
wasn't the toughest one that we had. It was less limiting than some of the other
things. Back to what we had, the lunar module still connected. We had all oxygen
we could ever want. It's only after we had to shut it off and get rid of it that
you had to use this stored oxygen in the cabin, a little bit out of that entry
tank. In fact, to pick ... we may not want to carry this one much further, but
we used the limb in what we call a lifeboat mode. It was a real systems
exercise. If there was ever a flight, you know, a lot of the times, we had
guidance and trajectory and I mean like the first landing on the moon and all
that. That was the key. Apollo 13 was probably the ultimate systems exercise
that we may have, any flight that we've ever done before or since. Because we
literally, as Glenn said, when they bailed out of the command module and went
over into the LIM to live, they just powered it down by turning everything off.
And, I mean, it cold soaked. They said there was actually kind of a, when they
went back in there, kind of almost it And it felt like a cellar. It was moist
and it was cold, and even some spots of ice, the thing just literally kind of
froze up. And they were over in the lunar module with the hatch closed, just
living off the lunar module at that time. They even powered, the crew powered
themselves down, too. They didn't do much, because they were trying to preserve
metabolic uses of oxygen, water, everything else. So it was a real thrill. But
you know, didn't you feel, I, I felt pretty comfortable that we had that thing
in tow. By the time they got out of the command module and got over into the LEM
and we saw and then we got the first chance and Glen and I were on these teams
that were continuing to work while Jean was off trying to figure out how to
bring that thing back up. Once we kind of got everything understood, I felt
pretty comfortable that we're going to be all right, as long as we kept the
guidance system up in the limb, which was a big test that we did later on right
before we went behind the moon. But it sure got our attention.
I have always remarked at the number of acronyms that are used in the space
business. and I remember one that came out of conversations on the loop Dr.
Lonnie I'm sure it did not go up to the spaceship but it had to do with
something that Steve may have been some of your responsibility to get back to
the earth where the lunar module was burned am I correct in that and the The
lunar module was really not intended to burn to bring a ship back to Earth, but
it was going to be used at this time while still connected to the command
module. And the guidance had to be very critical in the way the burn was done,
and am I correct in thinking that the stage that would burn would not gimbal?
Maybe it's neither here nor there, but in any case it was going to be a critical
burn. and so critical that the position of the astronauts, even in the ship, was
being considered. And those of you who knew Jack Swigert, a wonderful, wonderful
fellow, who had wound up on the mission, given 24 hours notice that he was going
on that mission, by the way, because he replaced Ken Mattingly, pulled off by
the flight surgeons because he had been exposed to the measles, measles that he,
of course, never did come down with, but that's beside the point. Jack was
aboard, and Jack was a very sturdy astronaut. I would guess he had been a
football player, and he worked out frequently, and he was a very strong and well
-built fellow.
and like many football players from time to time could consume vast quantities
of food, I might say. And the acronym call that I remember on the loop sometime
before the burn went something like CAPCOM, make sure that Swigert gets his FA
over the CG of the spaceship before the burn.
it's clear isn't it I remember I remember the date not always because of the 13
April the 13th but after the explosion and the ship was without any question on
the way to the moon hopefully to return but the jury was still out Jack once
again who had been put on his backup pilot on the 12th of April made a call down
to the the the Mocher to somebody please go over to his apartment get some
records from his apartment and mail in an extension to the Internal Revenue
Service because he had not filed his income taxes.
He was a loyal patriot. That's true. One other interesting story about the right
people being in the right place at the right time. I mean, it happened more than
once. Apollo 13, and I believe these guys would agree with me, all the lunar
module pilots were super people. But Fred Hayes, probably, who was a lunar
module pilot on 13, we all recognized probably the strongest systems guy in the
astronaut corps at that time. and knew more about how that lunar module was
wired together and all of that in the command module, probably more than he
should have because he ended up bugging us to death about it. But anyway, when
the accident happened, and this was very interesting, when he got back down to
the ground, of course the ground is, we all mustered too, and we had plots of
oxygen and everything, come to find out, and Fred showed them to me after we got
back, he had he had his own system analysis going. And when you laid what he
analyzed in terms of remaining quantities, time, all that, alongside what we had
done on the ground with all the help we had, they almost laid over one for one.
So here was a guy that had we lost calm, I suspect Fred would have had the
systems under control and probably would have figured out how to even get this
command module power back everyone's right after right time, another case, right
stuff. Question at the very back. Yes.
That was an interesting set of calls because at the time we went to the Apollo
13 in the it was the first time we went on what is called, or what we termed it,
a non-free return. All the previous flights had been designed so the trajectory
had very, very tiny mid-courses, and if you didn't make them, the design of the
trajectory was such that the vehicle would swing around the moon and come back
to the vicinity of the Earth. This time, in order to accomplish the mission, we
deliberately went away from that strategy. I think it was to save propellant or
something. So we were on a trajectory at the time of the tank blowing up in such
a way that we weren't coming back to the Earth at all. We'd have skipped by the
moon and gone some other place, not perhaps as nice as the Earth. And we had a
set of decisions to make, and they were coupled in with this question of how
much water we had, because we didn't want to keep this limb powered up any more
than we absolutely had to. So we had to go through a set of choices about what
kind of maneuvers could get us back to the Earth. I believe there was an option
that could have fired immediately and gotten us back, but I think it probably
bordered on using the command service module engine to do that, which we
couldn't power up anymore and wasn't available to us. Otherwise, we could have
done that. Jerry and I spent time going over the options that we had, both while
he was shotgunning on my shift and then as I handed over to him, and we had a
number of them, but most importantly in the few hours that we had after the
accident we were motivated to take the references the guidance reference that we
had on the command module transfer it to the LAM use the water that it took to
keep those systems powered and to get a burn out of the Lunar Module engine so
we were at least back on the track where we would return to Earth and we
accomplished that later on by swinging around the moon a small burn on the way
to the moon that put us back these free return trajectories to Earth. And then
at the moon we had, I guess you'd call it, a kick burn that we did to accelerate
the spacecraft back to the Earth even faster than the free return would have
allowed, and the whole thing was a balance of how close to run on the propellant
margins, how close to run on the water margins. but one of the considerations we
had in the hours immediately after the accident or the event was to try to at
least get the situation stabilized and getting back on a free return trajectory
with a relatively small lunar engine burn was the way to do that, and it was
important not only technically, I think it was important psychologically for the
people on the ground and I I think also for the crew members because they knew
they were in dire straits and at least we established a threshold of we could
fumble around quite a bit but maybe if we could pull off mid-courses later we
could still get the vehicle back to earth. And that was accomplished sometime
during the shift after the accident while I was on and kinda helped with the
psychological environment that we were dealing with with both those of us in the
control center and the three fellows upstairs. Yes.
Yes. Alright.
Good question, good question! Excellent question. In fact, every inch of that
computer was hand coded. None of these fancy languages or anything else. I think
it clearly depended on what kinda system we used. I'm sure that however we go
back to the moon, we will do it much more robustly. We'll have six or seven
systems instead of one, and we will manage however we go to fill up whatever
computer we choose to go with. The question, those of you at the back, was would
we dare land on the moon today with a computer with a capacity of only 16k,
which is what the lunar module computer had? The other thing about answering
that question, Steve is still in the operations business. Cliff and Jerry and I
have moved on to Program Management and other kinds of management where we are
concerned about how much money gets spent against what kind of requirements. I'm
quite sure that we could have a computer with a million K and it would be full
up and we just couldn't barely stuff all the stuff in it that we had to have and
we managers would be struggling with we ops people not to overload it anymore.
They just fill up. Yes.
This is a question about the computer alarms that came up during the descent of
Apollo 11 and how did the interplay go between crew and the flight controllers
and the flight directors. Steve, that's probably for you. 1201 means that during
the last computation cycle, the computer did not get through all its tasks. Now,
fortunately, the guys that had programmed it from MIT had put the least
important tasks at the end, such as crew display. They put the navigation and
the guidance up front. The crew in the landing module had very limited insight
with the computer. They only had three small readouts of five numbers each. And
they had some guidance needles. They had a two. They had some information. But
we had, for every parameter they had, we had on the ground maybe ten, twelve
parameters. So we were looking at a hundred, and they were looking at maybe 15.
And we had decided before the mission that if we did get into some... Oh, and
the other thing that had happened, is the crew had not had the benefit of this
day and a half long knock down, drag out about what we're gonna do about each
one of them that we had gone through the two weeks before. So we decided if any
of these alarms had to happen, we're gonna make the call from the ground because
we had more insight, and that's what happened.
I did. And conveyed it to a flight? The way we work in a control center is all
the operator and physicians convey their information to the flight director who
can overwrite anything you say, and in a time like that, he's more listening to
your tone of voice and actually as much listening to your tone of voice as it's
what you're saying because that in a time like descent that's what he's got to
go on. How convincing and how well have you done it in the past. I'd like to
comment on that, it's been mentioned several times about the flight director can
override. In point of fact, in a real-time situation where you're dealing in
seconds, it's not likely he's gonna override a guy that knows more about what
he's talking about than he does, but you're just not going to do that. You've
got to accept that the guy knows what he's doing and integrate it into the rest
of the things that are happening, and normally that's what you do. Now, if
you've got hours to debate it, you can say, well, let's talk about this some
more, but I don't ever recall, in a short time frame, I don't ever recall
overriding a flight controller. I kind of enjoyed the calm way which Steve just
said, I did. When you asked, you made the decision. As I recall at the time, his
voice was about eight octaves higher, and going higher every time he was asking
questions. Now you'd hear him all over the controls. He had Kraft
commented afterwards, he says, I heard that's just the loudest go I ever heard
in my life yes follow-up question I'm
sorry would you say that Say that again? Sorry.
Oh,
going over the abort rules. Steve might have an answer to it too. But my answer
to that is, there's a certain, oh I'm sorry, the question was do I believe that
Neil would've gone ahead with the landing no matter what? I think that's the
tone of the intent of the question. I would say that all of us in the business,
we say a lot of things about what we're gonna do and what we're not gonna do.
And conversation is cheap. You can hear anything you want from anybody. And many
of us have said things at times that really wouldn't probably turn out to be
true. I would say, though, that in this and many other cases, if not all, I
think people approach this thing, one, with a lot of confidence, one, with a lot
of gusto, but two, with a lot of reasonableness and common sense about what they
were getting into. I would be the last to say that I would believe that a crew
would go into a landing independent of what was facing them. I think, faced with
something, they would find some way to judge it and make a decision. As a matter
of fact, in the control center and in the cockpit over and over again, we didn't
make decisions on the basis of, well, we'll just try that, you know, or I'm
going to do it because I feel that way today. You know, it doesn't work that
way. There generally is a pretty solid, it might be a close call one way or
another, but there generally is a fairly solid basis for rationale for those
kind of decisions, and anybody that's spent his life flying airplanes, like Neil
had, knows that there's a certain amount of common sense has to enter into any
decision. And I always had confidence that that kind of common sense would be
exercised. So, very hard to make general, all-inclusive statements. I'd like to
add to that, Glenn. Neil is certainly as professional as anyone in the business
and an integral part of this entire operations team that Glenn spoke about. we
had built he also had been involved not too many months earlier in a situation
pretty close to the ground where it may or may not have worked and a decision
was made for him to jump out of a machine and he did and it saved his life I'm
talking about the lunar Lander trainer so he may I tend to think talks But, I
tend to think, had Charlie Duke called the board, we would have landed on Apollo
12. Let me add one thing here, there were a number of alarms, there were seven,
and the first one we got was up very high, over 20,000 feet. And then, Glenn
made the point, you know, what bases did the crew had at that point? They had
very little. They couldn't see the moon. we had debated for hours and hours of
what was the highest altitude that we didn't care what happened it was safer to
go ahead and land and then do anything else and yep you know the most people
said two three thousand feet maybe you could have stretched that to five
thousand maybe you could have stretched it a seven but you could not have
stretched that to 30,000 feet and so I think the answer might well have been
different is you know something at a thousand feet yeah something a 30,000 feet
and you can't see anything and have But no, I have no idea how to manually guide
yourself in, I don't think so. At the back in the suspenders question. But it's
a good story, Joe. We gotta keep putting that out. Right, right? Yeah, so. Yeah,
we got it.
A interesting question about the angle that the Apollo 14 spaceship was sitting
at after it had landed. I was on the descent on that. Did you get another award?
It had Cliff's name on it. The flat landing award, Jerry, the flat landing. You
know, 14, it's funny, I remember that now after you brought it up. That's not
what I talk about on 14 at all, but as being a problem, because we didn't come
anywhere near calling an abort. abort. It was tilted and, frankly, because I was
one of the last to know, I didn't realize it was tilted as far as it was. But it
was within the limits and never coming close to calling an abort. What we really
had on 14 that got your attention is that while we were still in lunar orbit,
the abort button shorted, in the lunar module, which meant that as soon as we
started the power descent, it would have aborted it. So we spent—we had to read
it up an octal, for those of you—because the only way those guys could get data
into the computer and we wanted them to feed it in was to put in a routine that
a young man at MIT developed. While we were in lunar orbit, after the abort
button light came on and we realized it was shorted, he came up with a routine
that we could feed in to the computer and it would essentially take the computer
around the abort button and let us go ahead and do the descent and they could
have aborted in another fashion. We had another way to abort with software. So
we sat there, I never will forget that, on the front side pass, and we had to
read up all the numbers and Ed Mitchell was a lunar module pilot, and he, we
watched it on the disk, the display the keyboard display that we had on
telemetry, and he read out every number that he put in there in a very careful
sequence, because we weren't gonna have a chance to check it out, or anything
like that. But we did back him up, and he put in that thing. The board light was
still on when we started burning. And I remember kind of saying, I hope this
works, because if we don't, we're not gonna land. And it, right passed it, and
on we went. So 14, we almost didn't make it because we couldn't get there. The
tilt was, it was probably, and I can't remember the angle now. Does anybody? It
was probably 8 degrees or something, 6, 8 degrees. But it was bigger than
anything we had seen before. That was an awfully rough area that they landed in
on 14. Actually, for a Navy pilot, Alan Shepard is pretty good landing. Yeah,
right.
John Kennedy's part
of the model, we've got some things around the world. The name
of Jiminy débats is about the averted several times? And were those more
difficult decisions than some of those made during Apollo? I don't really think
so. I think the biggest difference in the two programs was that we had fewer
problems with the Apollo hardware, the spacecraft, than we had on Gemini. We
seemed like every Gemini flight we'd lose a thruster and we'd have to work
around that or something would, small things would go wrong, and the Apollo
spacecraft, after the fire, when they went to the Block 2, and put that thing
back together and flew it on 7, was always, in my opinion, a superb spacecraft.
We just didn't have near the problems. So we did have some close calls on
Gemini, but I think overall it wasn't that much different. I thought Jim and I
was a lot of fun. I said earlier about the things we did. We did almost
everything you could do with a spacecraft and people in Earth orbit. But every
flight, we would talk about it was the fuel cells were flooding, and what are we
going to do now? The thrusters were failing, and how many do we have left, and
how are we going to continue with this? I remember Cliff and I used to have a
running argument once we started DVAs, flight after flight after flight with the
program manager, Chuck Matthews, because the little, let me call it, air
conditioner in the suit keeps the moisture out of the air, it was just wasn't,
it was like a half horsepower, and it was getting one horsepower worth a load of
moisture, and it just couldn't keep up. The visors were always fogging up every
time we went out, and guys couldn't hang on the spacecraft. And we would go and
argue with the program manager, and he kept telling us how this half horsepower
air conditioner was designed exactly right, and we would always agree, yeah,
it's exactly right for a half horsepower air conditioner, but we need a one
horsepower air conditioner. And we never did get one, so we had a lot of foggy
visors and spooky things, actually, associated with the EBA. So, in a manner of
speaking, the Gemini flights, with a variety of systems failures, really kind of
tested the mettle of the cruise. And Neil himself had to deal with an emergency
landing at one point because of a control system problem on Gemini 8. But that
was a real testing ground for the team of people. And it was almost the flights
were almost like the simulations. Well, we were worse. We had an expression
which they later outlawed. Kraft used to use this a lot about real-time flight
planning which gave one the impression that we didn't have a flight plan when we
started. We made it up as we went. And certain people took offense at that but
we did do a lot of that. And I can recall being over there at 2 o'clock one
morning with Dr. Lunny, we were doing a bootleg rendezvous on one of the Jiminy
Flights. This was an idea, Glen had dreamed up about doing a type of rendezvous
that would decrease the closing rates because the rendezvous scheme we had, you
had pretty high closing rates at the end. And we tried unsuccessfully to get
that through the system. So when we couldn't, we went around the system, and we
finally got somebody that would say yes if it doesn't interfere with any of the
scientific work that's going on on the experiments. So we said, no problem. So
we did that about two o'clock in the morning, and that's how I met Bob Pilon,
who was then the experiment program office manager. I looked around, and he was
sitting up in the viewing room intently watching us, I think, to be sure that we
did not do some of his experiment work. But we did it all, and we did the run of
it. I remember one of the conversations with the guys from Washington. We used
to have what they call the mission director. And he had a certain realization
that we were a little bit strong minded on our own down there on the next level
of the control center and bless his heart, after we'd been doing things like
this for six or eight Gemini flights, he came down and said to us, look guys, he
says, I know you're going to do anything you bloody well please anyway, but will
you please kind of let me know ahead of time so I can stay straight with my boss
and not getting a crack. Just a footnote to history. On the rendezvous, Glenn
did on Gemini 10. That's the baseline. Although we did not use that on Apollo,
it is the rendezvous technique we've used every time we've rendezvoused the
shuttle with something because it is superb for docking big rendezvous and big,
heavy vehicles together. And undoubtedly, it'll be the one we rendezvous at
Space Station on. And one other footnote. Gemini, in my recollection, and I was
not a flight director then, I was a flight controller. In fact, I was a GNC, and
so though we had... I'd say we did have the Gemini 8 problem, which was very,
very serious, and could have been a disaster, but it was a whole series of
little things. Every flight seemed to have, unlike Apollo, where you had this
nagging thing every now and then, but it was just a series of nagging things,
but I think that's what Gemini was all about, out, was to shake out some of
those kinds of...we learned a lot about thrusters. They just constantly were
clogged and didn't work right, but it was good hardware, and McDonald Douglas
did a great job with that system. Yes, question from the middle.
The questions about later flights and incidents that the questioner is
remembering abort switches and things like that. Well, I'll give you my answer,
and I'll let you guys tell you the truth, but I got out after Apollo 15, and I
was sentenced over to Building 1 in the program office at that time because I
was having too much fun, I guess. But after Apollo 15, which was the last flight
I was on, all the flights were easy. They were. That's good, Glenn. As a matter
of fact, you... I left after Apollo 12, and I made the same comment. They were
all easy after that. I bet we got these two guys out there really were a lot.
15, 16, 17 were that last block of spacecraft that were different, slightly
different. And the whole shift of emphasis I'd say on 15, 16, and 17, while we
had science emphasis on the earlier flights, you could see a trend getting
established. We had done it enough times that the transportation, the getting to
and getting back, was playing less an attention getter, and it took less of our
time. We just didn't have to spend quite as much time on where and how to get
there and back, because we had done that enough that we then started putting a
lot more time on the science. You remember we brought in the rover on those
later vehicles. We had a thing called the Sim Bay, which was the scientific bay
on the side of the service module. which did some great lunar mapping and things
like that. We did an EVA on the way back home, TransEarth to get that data out
of that sim bay. So it took a slightly different flavor. My recollection of 15,
16, and 17 were no, and I may, as soon as I say this, somebody's going to
remember one. I don't remember the big showstopper kinds of problems. We, as I
say, on 14, we almost didn't get docked. But 15 was pretty good. We had some
crew problems there with some, what we later determined, I learned more about
heart cardiovascular systems during that period than I ever thought I'd know.
And it was because of low potassium levels and it makes the heart do some funny
things. We had some problems with that on 15. It scared us because we didn't
know quite who it was. Once we understood it, we kind of overdid it on Apollo
16. we loaded them up with potassium to the point they were uncomfortable. And
that's all I'll say about that.
Maybe by 17, we might have gotten it about right. We had a lot of, I can
remember, I think it was Apollo 17, where we lost the fender on the rover. And
nobody would have ever thought that that would have been a big problem. But on
the rover, on the lunar surface, in this fine dust, without a fender on there.
It was throwing this dirt straight up in the air and covering everything. And we
finally had them fashion a little fender out using some checklist. They actually
pulled some checklist and got off, and they used some clips to fashion a little
fender to keep. So it was little stuff like that. I don't remember, and we got
those great shots. Remember when Fendell spent a career on figuring out how to
get that shot when we had the TV left on the moon of the ascent module coming
off and timing, because of the four-second delay, he had to send commands early
and zoom back and tilt, and we were really getting down to kind of fine-tuning
as I remember it in those last three flights. And like I say it was easier with
these guys not bugging us. Hey, by the way, at that time of the program, we had
the services of one Joe Allen is the CAPCOM and the Control Center for quite a
while, and there were a lot of reasons that people speculated why that was so.
Joe came to us with a PhD in something or another and was generally thought of
as a brilliant young man, although I can never understand exactly what it was
about that. But, Joe carried that off very well and he used to arrange for us to
go on geology trips and try to learn things like that. But, now, I learned
something here this afternoon. I think he just learned some words from his two
-year-old sun and faked it. But Jerry mentioned this rover, and Joe was the
Capcom in the control center, and I was still there on Apollo 15, and the guys
had this rover, and astronauts are kind of fighter pilot a lot, and they like
this little machine. I used to watch it on TV, and it went too fast. They would
drive it fast down the hill. One flight I flew with a rover on the surface, and
those guys up there running that bloody thing all over the place, I kept asking
Joe, Joe, please get them to slow down, please not so sharp a turn, and he would
give me an earth rock expression and go right on with whatever he was doing.
It's like, they know what they're doing. Actually easy for us to say, with the
lower gravity it's a lot easier to roll. So, I was more worried than I led on to
Director Lunning at the time. Jerry expressed it pretty well by then we were our
major problems were were bent fenders about by the time we flew Apollo 17 we
learned how to do it and it